https://twitter.com/Franc0Fernand0/status/1507736388891992064?s=20&t=sxYbnZphDGn69nnXLuChIA

The challenge of replicating data across multiples machines is handling data changes.

Almost 100% of distributed databases use 1 of 3 algorithms:

1. single leader
2. multi leader
3. leaderless

The choice is a matter of trade-offs.

Let's check their pros & cons. 

[Thread] ↓

1. Single leader

A single database acts as a leader, receiving and applying all write requests from clients.

All other replicas (followers) can only receive and answer read requests.

The main benefit is that this topology avoids write conflicts.

But there are also some downsides and limitations.

First, it can be used only if the single leader can handle all the writes.

So the application should not be write intensive.

Second, the system latency increase.

The leader can't be close to all the clients and the overall round trip times are higher.

Third, it's necessary to put in place a failover strategy in case the leader goes down.

This is quite hard and requires answering questions like:

- how to decide the new leader ?
- how to be sure that the leader failed ?
- how all replicas agree on the new leader ?

2. Multi Leader

More databases act as leaders, receiving and applying the write requests from clients.

The main benefit is that more databases perform writes, being located closer to the clients.

This increase the write throughput and reduce the latency.

The main drawback is that it's necessary to solve conflicts, since multiple replicas accept writes. 

There are 2 types of conflicts.

First, the leaders needs to be in synch preventing causality problems.  

This is usually solved using logical clocks.

Second, all the followers need to apply conflicting writes in the same order.

Some solutions are:

- attach a timestamp to each write and let followers apply the write with highest value

- record the conflicts and write application code to let users manually resolve them

- storing all the conflicting writes and returning them to the clients when they try to read that data. 

The client is then responsible for solving the conflict and write the data back to the database. 

For example, CouchDB does that.

3. Leaderless

Every replica can accept writes and the clients send writes concurrently to many replicas.

As soon the client gets a confirmation from some of them, a write is successful.

The main benefit is that failures are tolerated more easily without failover strategies.

But having no leader handling any kind of synchronization causes other issues.

First of all if some writes fail, the destination replicas will have staled data. 

To deal with this, clients need read data from several replicas concurrently.

The replicas then return their data and a kind of version number as well.

The clients can this number to decide which data to use and which to discard.

But how to synchronize replicas with staled data?

There are 2 common techniques.

READ REPAIR: when a client detects that one of read data is stale, it sends a write request with the correct data to the replica

BACKGROUND PROCESS: a background process take care of periodically synchronize the replicas
